=========================
Model Independent Details
=========================

As described in the :ref:`terminology section<terminology>` of the NK solver description, the NK solver is applied to a model that is comprised of a collections of tracer modules, each of which is comprised of tracers.
This section describes details of using the NK solver that are independent of which model the solver is being applied to.

------------
Solver Input
------------

Input to the solver consists of:

* a configuration (cfg) file, which contains settings of user-configurable options for the solver and model,
* a tracer module definition file, which contains definitions of the solver's tracer modules and the corresponding Jacobian preconditioner matrices,
* domain description files, which contain grid weights (e.g., grid cell volume) and region definitions, and
* an initial iterate file, which contains the tracer values for the initial iterate of the Newton solver.

User-configurable options for the solver and the model are in the configuration (cfg) file.
The file is parsed with the `configparser <https://docs.python.org/3/library/configparser.html>`_ module of the python standard library, so it is formatted following the `specifications <https://docs.python.org/3/library/configparser.html#supported-ini-file-structure>`_ of that parser.
The file basically consists of comment lines and lines of the form ``varname=varvalue``, that specify values for variables.
The variable specification lines are grouped into sections.
The solver's cfg file utilizes 3 sections, named ``DEFAULT``, ``solverinfo``, and ``modelinfo``.
The ``solverinfo`` and ``modelinfo`` sections contain variables related to configuration of the solver and model respectively.
A key feature of this file format is `interpolation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/configparser.html#interpolation-of-values>`_, the ability to substitute the value from one variable in another variable's value.
The ``DEFAULT`` section contains variables that are potentially interpolated into variables in both the ``solverinfo`` and ``modelinfo`` sections.
The default location of the cfg file is ``$TOP/input/$model/newton_krylov.cfg``, where ``$TOP`` is the toplevel directory of the repo and ``$model`` is the name of the model to which the Newton-Krylov solved is being applied.

The tracer module definition file is described :ref:`separately <tracer-module-defn-file>`.

-----------------------------
Interactive Solver Invocation
-----------------------------

The NK solver is invoked by running an invocation script, which is generated by the script ``src/gen_invoker_script.py``.
While this latter script can be invoked interactively with the command ``python -m src.gen_invoker_script``, this is usually not necessary, as there is a ``setup_solver.sh`` script that invokes it.
The ``gen_invoker_script.py`` script is designed to generate solver's invocation script for any model for the NK solver.
The default model is test_problem.
The path of the invocation script, which defaults to ``nk_driver.sh`` in the work directory, can be modified by changing ``invoker_script_fname`` in the cfg file.
The setting of the cfg file path to ``./src/gen_invoker_script.py`` is propagated to the solver's invocation script.

Invoking the invocation script with the ``-h`` option shows what command line options are available, such ``--resume`` to resume the solver after it exits, or ``--rewind`` to back up the solver one step when resuming.
The ``--rewind`` option is useful when resuming after a forward model run aborts.
Otherwise, the solver assumes that the forward model run was successful.

.. _solver_diagnostic_output:

-------------
Solver Output
-------------

Output from the NK solver is written to a work directory.
The location of the work directory is specified by ``workdir`` in the cfg file.

As the solver progresses, informational messages are written to a log file.
The path of the log file, which defaults to ``newton_krylov.log`` in the work directory, can be modified by changing ``logging_fname`` in the cfg file.
Setting ``logging_level=DEBUG`` in the cfg file will generate more output in the log file.
This can also be set via the command line option ``--logging_level DEBUG`` in the scripts (e.g., ``src/gen_invoker_script.py`` or the solver's invocation script).

The solver writes summary statistics for each tracer module being run to a netCDF formatted stats file.
The path of the stats file is ``Newton_stats.nc`` in the work directory.
The stats file includes mean and norm of the Newton iterates, their function evaluations, and the increments applied in Newton's method.
The stats file also includes dimensionally reduced tracers values from history file created from the function evaluation.
The dimensional reduction is model specific.
For example, the cime_pop model generates reductions along ``(nlat,)`` and ``(nlat, nlon)`` dimension tuples.
There are also tracer module specific variables added to the stats file.
For example, the cime_pop model adds integrated air-sea CO2 gas flux for the ``abio_dic_dic14`` tracer module.
